I believe there’s intelligent life on  other planets. And the most plausible  
reason why they haven’t contacted  us is that we’re too boring. I mean,  
we haven’t even figured out how to send  information faster than light. Pathetic.
But wait, let me guess. You’ve  heard that it’s impossible to  
send information faster than the speed  of light because, er, physics. Yes,  
I’ve heard that too. But I think it’s wrong.  And in this video, I want to explain why.  
Is it possible to break the speed of light  limit? That’s what we’ll talk about today.
If you’ve been following this channel for a  really long time, first of all, thank you,  
I know it isn’t always easy. Second,  you may remember that I made a video  
about faster than light travel already a few  years ago. But I think no one understood it. 
In fact, when I watched it again  recently, I didn’t understand it either.  
So please give me a second chance. Because I think  it’s becoming increasingly relevant to get this  
right. And this time, I’ll try to do it better.  I’ll even let you leave the toilet seat up.
In the past year or so, there’s been a lot  of talk about unexplained aerial phenomena,  
formerly known as UFOs. I don’t actually  believe any of those are of extra-terrestrial  
origin because, as I said, we’re just too  boring for aliens to bother visiting us.
Then again, what do I know? Maybe some of those  aerial phenomena really are space probes from  
alien species. And if we want to properly  evaluate how likely that is, we need to talk  
about the possibility of travelling faster  than light, or at least sending information  
faster than light. Because if it’s possible  at all, then that’s what the aliens are doing.
The Speed of Light as Limit
The idea that the speed of light is a limit  comes from Albert Einstein’s theory of Special  
Relativity. Yes, this guy again. The speed  of light plays a special role in his theory  
because it’s the only speed that’s the same  for all observers. And just to make sure,  
I mean the speed of light in vacuum. The  speed of light in a medium, any medium,  
is slower than the speed of light in vacuum,  
and depends on how you move relative to the  medium. But the speed of light *in vacuum  
does *not depend on how fast you move because  there’s nothing for you to move relative to.
I know this sounds about as exciting as flossing  teeth, but it has some unexpected consequences,  
and I don’t mean that your crowns pop off. Suppose you and your friend, let’s call him Bob,  
both have a water hose, and it spits out  water at, say 10 kilometres per hour. Bob  
gets on a train which moves at 200 kilometres  per hour. If you live in the United States,  
make that 20, then he turns on his  water hose again. The water moves  
with 10 kilometres per hour relative to  him. But how fast does it move relative  
to you? You’d expect it to be the speed of  the water plus the speed of the train, right?
Now imagine you don’t have water hoses but  laser pointers. They send out light with,  
well, the speed of light. Your friend  Bob gets on a train again. In vacuum,  
of course. Because this is theoretical  physics, where people don’t breathe,  
cows are spheres, and 3 is either equal to  pi or infinity, depending on whom you ask.  
How fast do you see the light of Bob’s laser?  You’d expect this to be faster than the light  
that comes out of your laser pointer by the  speed of the train, but not so. It moves with  
the exact same speed as yours. Because  the speed of light is always the same.
This is what was confirmed with the  famous Michaelson-Morley experiment,  
and it has a very odd consequence: You can’t  catch up with light. It doesn’t matter how  
fast the train is, light will still move  away from it with the speed of light.  
If that didn’t make your crowns pop off  you’ve probably heard it so many times  
before that you’ve forgotten how remarkable  it is. That, or you have a very good dentist.
We can quantify the difficulty of catching  up with light by asking how much energy it  
takes to accelerate an object. Let’s  suppose the object has a mass m. This  
mass corresponds to an energy which is  given by the most famous equation ever,  
E equals m c square, where E is the  energy and c is the speed of light.
But now we accelerate this massive object  from zero velocity to some other velocity,  
v. The energy you need for this acceleration  is the total energy of the object at the new  
velocity, minus the energy it previously had.  In Einstein’s theory, the total energy of an  
object that moves relative to you with  velocity v is given by this expression. 
Now if you want to know the kinetic energy,  
you take this and subtract the  same expression for zero velocity.  
So you get this somewhat messy expression, but  don’t despair, it isn't as bad as it looks.
For one thing, when the velocity, v, is  much smaller than the speed of light,  
then the ratio v over c is much smaller than  one. In this case, the complicated thing with  
the square root is approximately one plus one half  v over c square, the one cancels out and the c’s  
cancel out and you get one half m v square, which  you might remember is just the kinetic energy.
But we’re more interested in the case where  the velocity gets close to the speed of light,  
so v over c gets close to 1. Then  this factor gets close to zero,  
and the entire energy gets close to  one over zero, which is infinity. 
This means if you want to accelerate an  object until it reaches the speed of light,  
you need an infinite amount of energy. Another  way to put this is that the only way you can move  
at the speed of light is when your mass is zero.  Even a keto diet isn’t going to do that for you.
This is where the idea comes from that the  speed of light is a limit that you can’t cross.  
But… this argument has some issues. The first issue is that it doesn’t mean faster  
The Speed of Light as Barrier
than light travel is forbidden in Einstein’s  theory. Indeed, his theory is entirely compatible  
with faster-than-light travel. The problem  seems to be instead that you can’t accelerate  
from below the speed of light to above the speed  of light. It’s more like a barrier than a limit.
The second issue is more a peculiarity. It’s  that on all other occasions when physicists  
see some quantity go to infinity, they’ll tell  you that infinity is unphysical and a sign that  
the maths doesn’t properly work. Big bang, black  holes, non-renormalizable effective field theory,  
whatever. If there’s a singularity,  they’ll say it’s a mathematical artefact  
and not real. They don’t say that in  this case, and I think they should.
The third issue is that we have a counterexample  to the claim that one needs an infinite amount  
of energy to reach the speed of light,  which makes the argument extremely suspect.  
But to see why I say this, I first need  to tell you where mass comes from. No,  
it’s not too much cheese, it’s simpler than that.
Most of the mass of objects around you isn’t  really mass, it’s binding energy. You see,  
almost the entire mass of atoms is in the nucleus.  The nucleus is made of neutrons and protons,  
and the neutrons and protons are each  made of three quarks. For the neutron  
that’s two down and one up, and for the  proton it’s two up and one down. Quarks,  
not thumbs, I mean. The quarks do have  masses, but if you add them together,  
the sum is far less than the mass  of either the neutron or proton.
Instead, most of the mass of neutrons and protons  is the binding energy from the strong nuclear  
force that holds them together. We *interpret  it as mass because E equals m c square. But  
this means it’s really odd to put the mass of an  object into this equation in Einstein’s formula.  
Because really if you look at the object  microscopically, most of it isn’t mass. And,  
yes, that means most of you isn’t mass either.  You’re almost entirely made of pure energy.  
Though when I see how much time you spend  watching YouTube I find that hard to believe.
What’s with the remaining mass, the part that  isn’t binding energy? Electrons and quarks  
do have masses, albeit very small ones.  These masses come from the Higgs-field,  
not to be confused with the Higgs-boson. To be  more precise, the masses come from the condensed  
Higgs field. This Higgs-field condensate  fills the entire universe and drags on  
particles. It’s kind of like the 19th century  aether, but with two important differences.
First, the aether was believed to be necessary  for light to travel. But for the Higgs-field  
it’s the opposite. The particles of light,  the photons, are massless, which means they  
don’t feel the Higgs field at all. But other  particles do feel it. When the field condenses,  
it sticks to the particles. That slows them  down and it looks to us like they have a mass.
Another difference between the condensed  Higgs-field and the aether is that the  
Higgs-condensate looks the same for everyone,  regardless of how fast they move. It’s just a  
number at each point in space-time and everyone  agrees on what this number is. It’s like the  
number of socks in your washing machine.  Doesn’t matter how fast the spin cycle is,  
the number of socks doesn’t change. Or if  it does, I guess it’s time for new socks.
The aether on the other hand was believed to  be basically like a fluid. Some people would  
drift with the flow, and some people would move  against it, and they’d see different things.  
This is *not the case for the Higgs-field and  its condensate. If you like technical terms,  
and I just know you do, it’s a Lorentz-scalar  and invariant under Poincare transformations.
Ok, so the masses of fundamental particles  come from the Higgs-field. But. This is  
only the case when the field is condensed and  that wasn’t the case in the early universe.
Think of an early morning in spring. No, not the  coffee, I mean the dew on the grass. Where does it  
come from? Well, air contains water vapour, which  means that individual water molecules float around  
in the air. But warm air can hold more water  vapour than cold air. If the air temperature  
drops during the night, the water molecules  collect to form drops which are too heavy  
to keep floating, and they fall to the ground. The Higgs field has done a very similar thing,  
not at night, but in the early universe. In  the early universe it was really hot. There  
was a Higgs-field but it wasn’t condensed,  kind of like the water vapour in the air.  
But then the temperature dropped, and the Higgs  field condensed. This condensate now fills the  
entire universe. But it was only when the Higgs  field condensed that particles acquired masses. 
It’s a phase transition called “electroweak  symmetry breaking” and it’s believed to have  
happened about 10 to the minus  11 seconds after the Big Bang at  
a temperature of 10 to the 15 Kelvin, that’s  much hotter than even the centre of the sun.
What all this means is that in the early  universe none of the particles had masses.  
They were all massless, and they were all moving  with the speed of light. Later they were not. And  
here’s the important bit: The energy that was  released in this phase transition was finite.  
If it hadn’t been, we wouldn’t be here, and  someone would have written a paper about that,  
I’m sure. But the equation that we looked at  earlier said that the difference in energy  
should have been infinite. What gives? Mathematically it’s pretty obvious what  
goes wrong with the earlier argument. If you  look at this equation again, you see that if  
this factor goes to zero, but the mass *also goes  to zero, then the ratio can well remain finite.
This doesn’t help us at all to travel at  the speed of light. Because we can’t just  
uncondense the Higgs field. Even if we could, it’d  basically evaporate the traveller and, I mean,  
I’m not a doctor, but that’s probably not healthy.  So, this isn’t going to let us build a warp drive.  
But it shows that the argument that the speed of  light is a barrier isn’t even technically correct. 
Time Travel Paradoxes
There is another reason that physicists  often bring up for why you can’t travel  
faster than the speed of light, which is that  it can allegedly cause time-travel paradoxes.
The argument goes like this. Suppose  Alice observes a spaceship which goes  
by faster than the speed of light.  Zoom there it goes. Her friend Bob  
can’t afford the new super-duper spaceship  and lamely zooms by in last year’s model,  
at merely 90 percent the speed of light. Then  Bob would see the space-ship going back in time.
Let’s draw this into a space-time diagram to see  why. The horizontal axis depicts one direction  
of space, so left and right, for example. And  the vertical axis is time. A spaceship which  
doesn’t move, according to this axis, just makes a  vertical line. A spaceship at constant velocity is  
a line which moves at some angle. By convention  a 45-degree angle is the speed of light.
Alice just sits there and moves on  this straight line. And everything  
that happens on a perfectly horizontal line  happens simultaneously, according to Alice.
The faster-than-light space-ship goes by like  this. And Bob moves on this line. The question  
is now what Bob sees. For this, let’s look at  two particular events. And let’s make sure those  
events have a clear arrow of time from entropy  increase, let’s say someone drops a raw egg. The  
guy in the spaceship stumbles here, and the  egg smashes to the ground here. This means,  
importantly, that time on the space-ship passes in  this direction, and *not in the other direction.
Since Bob is moving relative to Alice, he  sees different events happen simultaneously.  
I explained this previously in my video  on why the past still exists. So, well,  
either take my word for it  or watch the other video. 
For Bob, events that happen at equal times are on  these straight lines, not on horizontal lines. You  
can then see that for Bob the order of events is  that the egg first smashes to the ground and then  
gets dropped. It seems that for Bob the time order  of the faster than light ship is reversed, crazy!
The first reaction you may have to this is:  Who cares what Bob sees? I mean you can watch  
this video in reverse and that doesn’t mean  I actually spoke in reverse. Fair enough.
The second reaction is to point out that this  isn’t what either Alice or Bob see anyway. You  
can’t see a faster than light ship coming for  the same reason you can’t hear a supersonic  
plane coming. What do you want to see it with?  Instead, both Alice and Bob will only see the  
spaceship after it’s gone by and then they’ll  see it moving away in both directions. And again,  
you can say, so what? I mean gravitational  lensing distorts galaxies into rings, alright,  
but that doesn’t mean the galaxy is a ring.  It’s just some weird trick on our perception.
And that’s entirely correct… But, you know,  physicists have noticed that too. Thing is,  
this wasn’t the entire argument. There’s  a piece missing which goes like this. 
Imagine you are Bob, and there’s really a  spaceship that can go faster than light and  
according to you that goes back in time. Let’s not  ask what this means but what you can do with it.  
If the time on the spaceship really  goes forward this way, then you can  
give a message to the guys as they come by.  They take your message to Andromeda, hand it  
over to another faster-than light spaceship,  and the second ship brings the message back to  
you. It would then arrive before you sent it. This means you could send messages to yourself  
back in time, and *that causes a lot of  trouble. Imagine that this video greatly  
disturbs you and you send a message  to your younger self to not watch it,  
then you’d never have sent the message in the  first place, so did you, or didn’t you watch it?  
This type of construction is also called a  time-like closed loop, it’s a loop in time. 
The argument then concludes that if  faster-than-light travel was possible,  
that would lead to causality  paradoxes, so it must be impossible.
But this argument is also wrong. The reason  is that just because according to Bob there’s  
a spaceship going that way with a time  that goes forward on the space-ship in  
a direction that Bob calls backwards in time,  that doesn’t mean if a space-ship goes that way  
then its internal forward-in time direction  would be that way. If the time-direction on  
the ship goes that way, they can’t deliver  a message to your younger self. Instead,  
your younger self can send a message  there, and nothing’s weird about that.
Physicists do have a reason to assume that  time on the space-ship could go this way,  
but it’s not a good reason. It’s because in  special relativity all observers must be treated  
the same. In Special Relativity, if you think that  this is possible, then this must also be possible.
But Special Relativity is special because  it doesn’t contain gravity and this means  
it doesn’t actually describe reality. For this, we  need general relativity. And while the time-travel  
argument is correct in special relativity,  it is not correct in general relativity.
I know this video is some tough going so  let’s stop for a moment to appreciate where  
we are. I summarised the usual argument  for why faster than light travel leads to  
time-travel paradoxes. I’m about to explain why  this argument doesn’t apply in the real universe.
The usual argument uses special relativity  according to which only relative velocities  
are physically relevant. In special relativity,  you can’t be at a velocity of absolute zero,  
that just makes no sense. But the  real universe contains stuff, as  
you’ve probably noticed. You can take all this  stuff, calculate the average velocity that it  
moves with. And then you can define absolute  rest to be motion that has no relative velocity  
to the average of all that stuff. Since you  like technical terms so much, it’s called the  
“co-moving frame”. It’s the reference frame  that moves along with matter in the universe.
We are currently not at rest relative to the  average of stuff in the universe because the  
earth goes around the sun and the sun goes  around the centre of the milky way and the  
milky way is rushing towards something  called the big attractor that no one  
really knows what it is. If you wanted to  be at rest with the universe you’d have  
to run at 300 kilometres per second into  this direction. No, wait. This. Or, this?
Alright, so there’s matter in the universe that  moves one way and not another. But what does this  
have to do with the time-travel story? Suppose  you are Alice again but now you are Alice in a  
universe with general relativity and you  are moving with the stuff, you are in the  
co-moving frame. And now assume that faster  than light travel is only allowed forward in  
time in this particular frame. In this case you  can’t make loops in time, regardless of what  
Bob thinks he sees. The co-moving frame defines  one direction as forward in time. The only thing  
Bob can do is send two signals to Andromeda,  and there’s nothing Paradoxical about that.
You may wonder now what the motion of matter  should have to do with the possibility of  
faster-than light travel? This is a very good  question to which the answer is: Quite possibly  
nothing. I just used this as an example. It’s  an example to show that faster-than-light travel  
does not necessarily imply time-travel paradoxes.  The latter just doesn’t follow from the former.
To add one final reason why you shouldn’t trust  the argument that faster-than-light travel is  
impossible is that we know our current  theory of space-time, General Relativity,  
can’t be correct because it doesn’t work together  with quantum theory. This is why we need a theory  
of quantum gravity, and we still don’t have one.  We know however that causality and locality become  
really screwed up in quantum mechanics, and the  same is probably the case in quantum gravity. 
This is why I think it’s extremely  implausible that any argument about  
faster-than-light travel would survive in  the to-be-found theory of quantum gravity.
Of course you already know that no one’s figured  out how to travel faster than the speed of light.  
But I hope I have managed to convince at least  some of you that the formal reasons you may have  
heard against it are on shaky grounds. This is  why I believe physicists should think a little  
harder about faster-than-light travel. At the very  least, then maybe humans wouldn’t be so boring. 